# The End of Theory

Financial Crises, the Failure of Economics, and the Sweep of Human Interaction

By: [Richard Bookstaber](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Bookstaber)

[Main Page](https://ejjaffe.github.io/ejaffe-books/)

## Introduction
I'm excited to be reading this book, which I hope will be a deeper critique on the parts of classical economics that I found to be less than satisfying in college. Bookstaber is a professor at University of California, formerly at the US Treasury and a risk-manager at Morgan Stanley. 

Bookstaber's main idea is that **classical economic models are too idealized to be useful in our chaotic, imperfect world. He introduces a paradigm called "Agent-Based Economics"**, which I'm excited to compare and contrast with existing approaches to behavioral econ. I am also interested in how this book might be understood by philosophers of science like Kuhn, Feyerabend, or Lakatos, which may require extra reading.

I will be summarizing and adding links or additional mathematical or philosophical notes to chapters, as I see fit.

## Chapter 1: 
**Rationality and Crisis**
* UChicago economist Robert Lucas: "Economics could not give useful service to the 2008 economic crisis because economic theory has established it cannot predict such crises." He cites two works, one by Watson (2014) called ["Uneconomic Economics and the Crisis of the Model World"](https://www.amazon.com/Uneconomic-Economics-Building-Sustainable-Political/dp/1137385480) p 74-75 (Amazon.com), and Lucas (2009), ["In Defense of the Dismal Science"](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2009/08/06/in-defence-of-the-dismal-science), (The Economist, Paywalled).
* A brief mid-1800's history of the legacy of neo-classical economic theory pioneered by [William Stanley Jevons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Stanley_Jevons) and [John Stuart Mill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Stuart_Mill). Despite these great mathematical ideas, the mid-1800's saw labor unrest and industrial revolution driving severe inequality. The industrial revolution made the ratios of quantity of labor vs quality and demand variable, something J.S.M. did not account for.
* Economic theory splits here: one focusing on the historic, societal, and systemic impacts seen in the pursuit of capital (Marx), and the other seeking to make economic theory more like the natural sciences (Jevons). As was appropriate for the time, Jevons thought of the economy in terms of natural principles, and did not strongly consider "irrational" human factors. (Science in the 1800's used idealized forms of nature and minimized the impact of social or cognitive interactions with reality. See "Objectivity" by Lorraine Daston. This is another book I would like to get to.) He is the origin of "The First Axiom of Economics: Assume all agents are rational".
* At the time, the ruling [Ricardian School of Economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ricardian_economics) was overtaken by Jevon's [Ideas](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/william-jevons/#Eco).
* However, Jevons could still not predict crises. Because the paradigm at the time was highly naturalistic, He tried to relate the natural cycle of sunspots as a means of explaining crisis in economics. After multiple failures in various scopes, he continued to seek an explanation in sunspots, and occasionally astrology.
* Bookstaber points at two leading causes for the whole sunspot thing. Jevon's inability to explain crisis meant his model was flawed, as natural models are ideally complete and universal.To prove himself, he had to explain crisis using his naturalisitic assumptions. Secondly, bookstaber thinks Jevon's dependence on mathematics is inherently weak. (I don't know if Bookstaber means "rigid use of traditional models" or "any mathematical techniques at all".)
* Bookstaber claims that the weakness of mathematics was evident in 2008 when modern economists could not agree whether economic recession was on the decline or retreat. I don't agree. It's one thing to agree on a conclusion about the economy, and another to be right. "Will the economy get better?" with respect to what? First of all, "better" is poorly defined, and "are we getting better" is a question that carries lots of unclear assumptions when you have millions of metrics.  Popular economic theories and finacial models were not in unison. That's a fault of the current economic establishment and theory, and I wonder if it's unfair to say Bookstaber is judging a fish on it's ability to climb a tree. Or answer a potently vague question, for that matter. I'm not sure it disqualifies mathematics from providing assistance in understanding our world. I strongly suspect Bookstaber's own solution will utilize concepts one can find in mathematics.
* Despite the assumption of rational actors and systems, we accept that crisis is unexplainable and unpredictable. "Economics works, until it doesn't" writes Bookstaber. "Everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth."
* Stunning absoloutely nobody, Bookstaber insists the solution is agent based economics, with an emphasis on **the mathematical/scientific ideas** of complexity/chaos theory such as emergent phenomena, ergodicity, and computational irreducability. From this stance I think we see his idea of mathematics is "basic traditional models".
* I think that Bookstaber is about to tear into classical/neo-classical economics just like Behavioral econ did, but sloppier, in a way that ignores scope -- rationality isn't neccisarily always inappropriate for considering economic decisions. Behavioral economics largely focuses on in-person interactions on the individual scale. Large-scale actors such as financial institutions probably operate  according to "rational" economic theory, especially since they have been indoctrinated in the theory themselves.
